####################################################################################
If you use these codes in your research, please cite the following manuscript:

Zhou, X., and Y. Ben-Zion (2025), A simulator of earthquakes and aseismic slip on a heterogeneous fault (HFQsim) with static/kinetic friction and temperature dependent creep, J. Geophys. Res., in review.                                     

This application is also available on Statewide California Earthquake Center (SCEC) Quakeworx gateway via:
https://qwx1.onescienceway.com/app/qwx1fabiohfqsim1

Contact: Xiaoyu Zhou, zhou226@usc.edu  
####################################################################################


OVERVIEW
An earthquake simulator to study the partitioning of seismic/aseismic slip and dynamics of earthquakes on a Heterogeneous strike-slip Fault (HFQsim) using a generalized model of a discrete fault governed by static/dynamic friction and creep in an elastic half-space. The simulator includes a feedback between frictional heat generated by earthquake slip and subsequent creep slip on the fault. The simulator generates multiple realistic features of earthquakes (e.g., frequency-size statistics, spatio-temporal clustering including aftershock sequences, heterogeneous slip patterns).


FEATURE
The code is written in C++ and parallelized using OpenMP. All the source codes can be found under /src/cpp/. To run the program, first run Make file under /test/test_model to compile all codes and run using ./run_test.sh. 


INPUT PARAMETERS
Values of all the controlling model parameters should be defined in the text file /test/test_model/input_parameters.txt, with each parameter separated by a new line and following the EXACT ORDER listed below. Please refer to the paper for detailed definitions of each parameter. 
Geometrical Parameters:
1. nL                                (model resolution along strike, 256 is used in the paper)
2. nD                                (model resolution along depth, 64 is used in the paper)
3. Fault length                        (Unit in km; Fault along-strike dimension, 70 km is used in the paper)
4. Fault depth                        (Unit in km; Fault depth dimension, 17.5 km is used in the paper)
Frictional parameters:
5. Static coefficient of friction         (Uniform value fs = 0.75 is used in the paper)
6. Cohesion                         (Unit of MPa; 10 MP is used in the paper)
7. Strength Change Parameter        (Unitless parameter ε, controls relationship between static/dynamic strengths, and arrest stress. Results with ε=0.8 and ε=0.1 are presented in the paper)
Creep parameters (functions of space, time, temperature, and activation energy):
8. Activation Energy                (E in unit of kJ/mol; 130 kJ/mol is the initial value used in the paper)
9. Acti. Ene. of damaged rocks        (Ratio of E of damaged rock, 0.8 is used in the paper)
10. Healing time min                (Unit of days; minimum healing time in days for a full recovery of activation energy E; see Equation 7 in the paper for details; 1 day is used in the paper)
11. Healing time max                (Unit of days; maximum healing time in days for a full recovery of E; 365.25 days = 1 year is used in the paper)
12. Random Seed                         (Integer used for random seed to generate fluctuation of activation energy. For repeatability, specify a positive integer value. For random generation, use any random integer.)
Thermal parameters (initial temperature follows a geothermal gradient):
13. SlipZoneWidth                (Unit of meter; controls co-seismic temperature change, 0.05 m is used in the paper)
14. Cooling_distance        (Unit of meter; controls the decay of temperature increase, 100 m is used in the paper)
Initial distributions of fields at cell centers:
Available options are listed below for different types of stress drop distributions and initial slip deficit distributions. Resolution must be the same as your choice of nL and nD. 
15. Stress drop (τ_s-τ_a)                (pre-generated initial stress drop distribution)
   1. ../../inputs/stressdrops_2to6MPa_256_64.txt                 (case 1, uniform distribution [2,6]MPa )
   2. ../../inputs/stressdrops_2to6MPa_128_32.txt                 (case 1, uniform distribution [2,6]MPa for lower resolution with nL = 128, nD = 32)
   3. ../../inputs/stressdrops_RandomWalk_rn2MPa_20%_256_64.txt         (case 2, random walk distribution)
   4. ../../inputs/stressdrops_RandomWalk_rn2MPa_20%_128_32.txt         (case 2, random walk distribution for lower resolution with nL = 128, nD = 32)
   5. ../../inputs/stressdrops_        Circular_256_64.txt                (case 3, circular asperity)
16. Initial slip deficit        (initial slip deficit distribution)
1. ../../inputs/initSlipDef_2500yr_256_64.txt                (distribution of slip deficit generated by  2500-year case 1 simulation with nL=256 and nD=64. This can be used for case 1 simulation for faster results.)
2.  ../../inputs/initSlipDef_zero_256_64.txt        (zero initial slip deficit, nL=256, nD=64. The model needs roughly 2,500 yr to produce stable earthquake sequences.)
3.  ../../inputs/initSlipDef_zero_128_32.txt        (zero initial slip deficit, nL=128, nD=32
Running Parameters:
17. timeMax                (Unit of year; Maximum simulation time)
18. tSave_min                (Unit of year; Initial time to save time evolutions of model parameters including: time step, stress, slip, temperature, activation energy, creep velocity. This will slow down the simulation.)
19. tSave_max                (Unit of year; End time to save time evolutions of model parameters.)
20. Output_file_prefix        (User specified prefix of all the output files.)


Values of all the other physical parameters of the model (Zhou and Ben-Zion 2025, Table 1) are material properties, which are specified in /test/test_model/input_parameters.h


Model Outputs:
Synthetic catalog: 
Earthquake catalog generated by the model is recorded in test_model_eqcat.out. The synthetic catalog has 8 columns, including 1. Earthquake time; 2. Hypocenter location along strike; 3. Hypocenter location along depth; 4. Local magnitude following scaling relation of (Trugman and Ben-Zion, 2024); 5. Potency magnitude following quadratic form of (Ben-Zion and Zhu, 2002); 6. Moment magnitude following Hanks and Kanamori scaling relation; 7. Rupture area; 8. Average stress drop. 


Files generated when you start the model:
1. Initial temperature on the fault, which is the same as background temperature profile.
test_model_faultBkgdT.txt 
2. Distribution of Arrhenius amplitude 
test_model_Arrheamp.txt
3. Initial distribution of activation energy 
test_model_activE.txt
4. Distribution of strength change parameter
test_model_SCP.txt
5. Distribution of healing time
test_model_tau_heal.txt
6. Distribution of strength profile
test_model_strengthProfile.txt


Files record time evolutions of model parameters, which will slow down the simulation. The time interval of recording is defined by running parameters 17 and 18. If you do not want to save those files, set parameters 17 and 18 larger than the simulation time (parameter 16). 
1. Model time step. (X denotes time sequence of those files)
test_modelX_timeStep.txt
2. Type of slip at each time step. 1 means aseismic slip; 2 means seismic slip. 
test_modelX_slip_type.txt
The following files have a format of 1D array with nL*nD*nTimeStep data points. Index of point (i,j) at time step k is: (k-1)*nL*nD+(i-1)*nD+j
3. Slip values at each time step
test_modelX_faultSlip.txt
4. Time evolution of slip deficit
test_modelX_hist_slipdef.txt
5. Time evolution of stress on the fault
test_modelX_hist_tau.txt
6. Time evolution of temperature change on the fault
test_modelX_hist_dT.txt
7. Time evolution of activation energy on the fault
test_modelX_hist_actE.txt
8. Time evolution of creep velocity on the fault 
test_modelX_hist_vc.txt


Files generated when the simulation is finished. 
1. Cumulative aseismic slip
test_model_creepslip.txt
2. Cumulative seismic slip
test_model_eqkslip.txt
3. Final stress on the fault
test_model_finalstress.txt
4. Final slip deficit on the fault
test_model_finalslipdef.txt